I'm not feeling so well.
I'm going to be late tonight.
I was gonna try and make up some excuse for it.
I miss you.
What are you up to?
You have a point.
This is a bad idea.
This isn't a good idea.
This is what it comes down to.
I'm gonna be late tonight.
Do you wanna get some coffee later?
Hey. What's up?
I'm sorry.
What time do you want to go out?
I have to finish my homework.
hey, here is the place we talked about yesterday.
First I've heard of it.
Need anything from Trader Joe's?
I'm leaving now.
What time should I pick you up?
Good to know.
Give me a call later.
Where are you?
How are you?
What do you wanna do tonight?
Where do you want to go?
Hello, how are you?
Why don't we go for dinner later tomorrow?
I'll see you at home in a little while.
Should we watch a movie tonight?
What time is it?
Where are you going?
Are you going to get it?
Are you gonna get it or not?
You think they would go there?
I was about to leave, should I?
I am not there yet but will be there shortly.
We already ordered one, thanks!
Oh, you're leaving?
I'll meet you there man. 
Nice to see you the other day. 
Wanna hang out later? 
Let's meet up after. 
Meet you in 5
I'll be there soon
Held up, call you later
Miss you too
Wish you were here
I'll be there too
In a few.
This is a common sentence
Fleksy is a revolutionary keyboard technology that allows users to type text on the familiar keyboard layout by tapping on the screen. 
Our patent pending technology does not need accuracy, just tap on the screen and Fleksy will automatically detect the word you meant to enter, even if you have missed every single key.
Hey, wanna hang out?
Where are you?
Want to get some coffee? 
That movie was legit
Tailor responses to California swag
How can I help you?
Let me know what you need
Let us know how it goes
Are you ok?
How did it go with the thing?
You still owe me from that other time
We're even after that
Forget about it
Let's talk later
Glad to catch up
Catch me up with your process later, ok?
Thanks for getting back to me!
Thank you for your feedback, much appreciated
I'd like to share some feedback with you.
We'd love to make the experience better for you
Let us know what we should be working on next
Check out our Beta community where we release new features and languages first
Join me for a drink?
Hi! My name is this and I'm an alcoholic.
Is this a thousand lines yet?
I did a thousand lines the other day
Coming or not?
Let's go to lunch!
I didn't realize that, was planning on leaving here in a few to work from the office.
It's a big news day.
No matter what happens, there is no space in the car.
Hope you understand and see my point of view here too.
Can't wait to hear your news.
If you have any trouble, I talked to the owner.
They just messed up the order for us.
I thought you were waiting for me.
Where are you, I can't find you.
Are you on your way home?
I really wish I felt well enough to go for a run.
I just found this place that is so good.
Is my lunch this thing that looks like a pizza?
Will you please check to see if they have a nose spray?
Maybe they charged for some from yesterday?
I am just having some margaritas on the beach before going to pitch investors down in the valley.
Bill is doing some testing on new devices which might prove some new problems. So when I go here and unlock, right, the next time the keyboard pops, I get this toast. Many people think they didn't unlock it.
How are they gonna know?
Why are people so stupid?
Those think that it's been there forever.
But you can't know that.
You can do it put your ass into it.
But you want them to share it, not something else.
Life is full of amazing surprises.
Tonight I was supposed to have dinner with my wife and her sister, but it turns out I am going to get drunk with friends instead. 
Shall we go to ski this weekend? There is new snow!
You know where we can get a lot of good messages Kosta?
That's pretty cool.
I am just going through the text messages on my phone and I think it needs some basic logic working and know why it should be working.
These are some good sample sentences of what typical users write.
But we can fix those problems.
Me and my friend are running sentences now and we should be able to give you thousands of words really soon.
And in fact anyone who wants to take a break, why don't you just write some sentences and send them on e-mail?
Just regular sentences like how are you, or shall we watch a movie, or things like that. 
Hi, how are you doing?
I should probably get a burger.
King Burrito is the ruler of Mexico.
Hot dog is probably the best dog ever.
I should do groceries.
I'm too lazy to breathe on a winter's day.
Fine. How about you?
How many brothers and sisters do you have?
I couldn't care less, if the washing machine gets broken down.
I am so sick and tired of french fries that are not enough fried.
Cut it out! I'll drop you a line when I have time.
I figured that out last night.
I am not really up to this, I believe I bit off more than I can chew.
Can you fill in for me today so I can go to bungee-jumping?
I know things have been difﬁcult for you recently, but keep your chin up.
We need to get this project started as soon as possible.
I’m hoping you will help me get the ball rolling.
We did everything according to the terms of our agreement.
As a matter of fact, we have been to the history museum many times.
As long as you promise to be careful you can borrow my car.
I will go to the movie with you for sure next week.
My friend is having trouble getting through her ﬁnal exams.
I have much reading that I must get through before tomorrow.
The game will probably go on for an hour after we leave.
It does not make a difference whether our boss comes to the meeting or not.
Most members of the class were open to the teacher’s ideas.
Regardless of the weather we are going to go ﬁshing tomorrow morning.
So far no one has entered the speech contest at the television station.
The teacher told us to take out our books.
I took out some onions from the refridgerator.
I plan to provide information about the new company policy to the extent that I am familiar with it.
I do not know what the company will do with respect to the old computer system.
I hope that everything will work out for my friend when she moves to London next week.
Why so serious?
There are no monuments dedicated to me and my name will soon be forgotten, but I’ve loved another with all my heart and soul, and to me, this has always been enough.
This city is afraid of me.
I have seen its true face.
Either get busy living, or get busy dying.
Do. Or do not. There is no try.
I see dead people.
The first rule of Fight Club is: you do not talk about Fight Club.
And the eighth and final rule: if this is your first time at Fight Club, you have to fight.
Houston, we have a problem.
Life was like a box of chocolates.
You never know what you’re gonna get.
For tonight, we dine in hell! This is your last chance.
After this, there is no turning back.
You take the blue pill – the story ends, you wake up in your bed and believe whatever you want to believe.
I’ll be back.
Say hello to my little friend.
With great power comes great responsibility.
I’d rather you just said thank you and went on your way.
I'm going to make him an offer he can't refuse.
I love the smell of napalm in the morning.
Round up the usual suspects.
After all, tomorrow is another day! Today, I consider myself the luckiest man on the face of the earth.
I'm the king of the world! All of us here are pleased that the courts have acquitted him and made it clear that in Russia, too, access to environmental information is a constitutional right.
Why has no air quality test been done on this particular building since we were elected?
It seems absolutely disgraceful that we pass legislation and do not adhere to it ourselves.
I admit that, at present, the matter seems to be somewhat confused.
As people have said, the situation there is extremely volatile.
There has therefore been enough time for the Commission to prepare its programme and for us to become familiar with it and explain it to our citizens.
You cannot prepare if you hear a statement in this House and have no idea of its content.
I therefore think it is crucial for the environment that the ban on using poisonous heavy metals should be fully implemented and that we should not reduce manufacturers' liability.
It is, as it stands, perfectly acceptable.
We have arrived at the final question.
That is quite simply: Who pays?
I cannot accept it and I will not vote for it.
I would remind you that car manufacturers have admitted that they can live with the directive; the costs are not excessive: recycling a car costs less than 1% of the price of a new car.
It is far too prescriptive.
It sets in stone one particular model of recycling.
This method of disposal of cars carries no cost and so would eliminate the whole issue of who pays because the "dead" car would actually have a small value going into the recycling and reclamation process.
Clearly, we shall all have to bear the cost of serious damage to the environment, but it will be very much greater.
Do we imagine, then, that the cost would disappear if we were not to adopt this directive?
No.
Do you believe that consumer demand for environmentally friendly cars and more fuel-efficient cars is going to decline in the future?
If we develop motive power of the kind I have described, I am quite certain that market forces and commercial interests in the car industry will ensure that mechanisms develop for dealing with both the cost and the workload.
That is what I should like to say by way of introduction.
I naturally hope that the result of today' s vote will be a good one.
A total of 48 amendments have been tabled.
Yes!
